---
layout: post
title: Drone Privacy
---

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) or more popularly ‘drones’ are a game changing marvel of technology representing a world of possibilities for innovation and utilisation, especially during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, where this technology can prove to be useful for contactless operations in the wake of the exigent need to reduce human contact as a health precaution. However, the drone regulations in India are still at a stage of infancy and the question that becomes vital in this scenario is whether India’s nonchalance with regard to drone laws is setting it back by decades? The article attempts to answer the question by analysing the viability of the numerous features of India’s drone policy while also highlighting the accompanying challenges that encumber India’s drone sector from reaching its full potential. The article also deals with the interplay between privacy issues and the usage of drones, and lays down certain modifications needed in the current law.

### Status Quo

It was the fateful day of 11th May 2014, when a pizza outlet in Mumbai air-dropped a food delivery with the use of a drone, which ultimately led to the 2014 blanket ban on drones and set back the Indian drone industry by years. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) banned the use of drones by citing that Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) poses a security threat due to lack of regulation, operating procedures/ standards and uncertainty of the technology.Hence, drone regulations were indeed “unmanned” till recently in India. It was only in 2018, when DGCA announced the country’s first Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR) ,which sought to regulate the operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA), an unmanned aircraft piloted from remote pilot station , thereby encompassing Unmanned Aircraft system (UAS) or ‘drones’ as is known in common parlance. The policy, touted as ‘Drone Policy 1.0’,came into effect on December 1, 2018 and classified drones on the basis of ‘all-up weight’, the total weight with cargo and fuel, ranging from Nano drones weighing up to 250 grams to large drones upwards of 150 kgs, while expunging nano drones from its purview. 

One of the key tasks of the first policy was to initiate the operation of Digital Sky, a platform which sought to enable the operators to fly drones by giving permission 24 hours prior to their planned flight. The policy further marked the genesis of the novel ‘No Permission No Takeoff’ (NPNT) clause, which provides that a drone cannot be operated in the sky unless regulatory permission is received through the digital sky platform. This policy allowed civil use of drones but framed complex legal guidelines which stipulated inclusion of an extensive list of essential equipment. However, they were not available in most of the drones that were being imported into India. Further, many of the hardware manufactures still don’t have a clear idea of how to embed the equipment and software for making it compatible with Digital Sky, thereby compelling them to take the easy route of conducting unregulated drone operations. Further, exclusion of nano drones from any semblance of regulation was disconcerting as it failed to take into account that this obliteration completely disregarded the threat of potential violation of the right to privacy by non- stipulation of adherence to privacy standards by drone operators. A nano drone flying below 15 metres in an unregulated airspace for commercial, recreational or developmental purposes may violate privacy of individuals in intrusive ways as it can peer into windows of homes, fenced backyards or gardens, etc. This has created a grey area for drones flying below the 15-metre mark and has resulted in an uncharted and unregulated space which poses security threat.

Hence, under Drone Policy 1.0, the potential to exploit drones for commercial purposes was limited and it was further marred by the lacunae of non- recognition of the paramountcy of privacy rights. Therefore, in awaiting the proper yet effective implementation of the first drone policy, second drone policy, ‘Drone policy 2.0’ was also rolled out on 15th January 2019 by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The policy sought to enable the commercial use of drones to facilitate opening of new avenues of service provisions in India, like delivery of goods, human organs and blood. It further sought to establish drone corridors, entailing airspace segregated from flight paths of manned aircraft, with the aim of facilitating uninterrupted movement of drones.

It also extended the 400 feet limit of Visual Line of Sight (VLOS) to enable swifter and relatively flexible commercial deliveries; VLOS being unaided vision except for prescription glasses or sunglasses, and not having to use binoculars, telescopes or zoom lenses to see the unmanned aircraft. Beyond VLOS (BVLOS) capabilities enable a drone to cover far greater distances. It warrants service providers to conduct complex drone operations and facilitate drones to fly without any human interference, while collecting more data in fewer deployments. It can further facilitate replacement of traditional long-range aerial data collection platforms such as manned aircraft and satellites in a more efficient and cost-effective manner. BVLOS operations, as a concept poses to be a lucrative enterprise. However, its current functionality in India is unavailing as commercial deliveries via drones are prohibited presently. This makes such operations futile for delivery industries which is one of the areas where drones could be mostly used.

While the drone policy 2.0 established an intricate system of application and approval procedures, it does not account for thorough monitoring of drones. The policy further lacks in addressing the rapid advances in Artificial Intelligence and its effect on drone-based solutions – for instance, monitoring the collection, use, storage and sharing of data by drones. The computer vision which plays a key role in drone technology to identify objects, humans and animals while flying can be made smarter by the use of Artificial Intelligence. While these sophisticated Artificial Intelligence-based drones are already being used by online retail giants like Amazon to deliver their products on the doorsteps, India lags behind by not incorporating provisions for such drones in its policy.

### Digital Sky: Biting its own Tail

Digital Sky is a first of its kind Unmanned Aircraft Traffic Management system in India for civil drones in the country that should have facilitated easy registration and authorised flight of drones. In India, the digital sky is operated by the Government itself since it is a critical infrastructure system intended to serve a broad range of objectives and missions. The government has hesitated in outsourcing the management of unmanned traffic in India because it wants to maintain interoperability and keep the system free from vendor capture in the long run. Unlike India, other countries are turning to external providers to control the unmanned traffic due to the various advantages of distributing authority such as easy and quick adaptation of changes as the market evolves by independent service providers as compared to the government.

The government, in recent times, has made efforts to regulate the drone sector by introducing policies. However, these policies are marred with certain flaws. India’s drone policy is considered to be one of the most comprehensive yet complex policies in the world. A very unique clause i.e. the NPNT clause which was introduced with the objective of safeguarding the drones against security and privacy issues, ironically became a hindrance in achieving the same. It was in 2019 (more than a year after the drone policy came into effect) when two Bengaluru start-ups became the first companies to be certified by the DGCA as they complied with NPNT protocols. Furthermore, in July, 2020, Pune-based Quidich Innovations Labs, along with Asteria Aerospace, completed the first NPNT-compliant drone flight marking the first such operation since the policy came into effect. This implies that even after the policy was effected, there have only been non-NPNT compliant drone operations. While there has been no official data, it is estimated that approximately 2 lakh commercial and recreational drones are still operating illegally. Another problematic aspect of NPNT is that it requires certain software add-ons on the drones which ensure that a drone is not operated unless the regulatory permission is received. This poses an obstacle for drone manufacturers as they have to ensure that their drones have the necessary add-ons without which they cannot sell their drones in India. 

According to a report titled “Make in India” by Ernst & Young and FICCI, it is estimated that the Indian UAS market is expected to reach $885.7 million by 2021 which is 4% of the nearly $21.47 billion global market, making India the fifth largest importer of drones. However, compared to countries like the US and China, India is far behind in manufacturing of non-military drones. This is due to the lack of demand for drones in the domestic market because of the prevailing rigorous regulations. Experts believe that increasing drone manufacturing in India will not only boost the local industry but also generate millions of employment opportunities across sectors. However, despite having a rich ecosystem of hardware engineers and software developers, India’s drone sector is hindered by stringent flight restrictions. While it is understandable that since, drone technology poses certain threats to privacy and security, there is a need for strict regulatory mechanisms. However, given that the market for commercial and recreational drones in India is the one which is the worst affected by the restrictive policy, the government should consider relaxing the rules for preliminary legalisation of such drones, by reducing the involvement of multiple regulatory agencies and streamlining the compliances and clearances.

### Sidestepping the Law

It is the inherent shortcomings of the drone policy that have widened the scope of circumvention. The policy is entrapped in the problems of its own making. This is instanced by the ground reality that the platform of Digital Sky, which was supposed to be at the centre of the drone policy, fails to achieve the purpose of single window clearances as it mandates multi-faceted clearances, which moots the focal aim of making operation of drones comparatively easy. This disincentivizes the drone operators to comply with the policy regulations. 

Although, National Counter Rogue Drone Guidelines (NCRD Guidelines) was formulated with an aim to address the perceived law and order and national security issues that are anticipated due to unregulated and unchecked operation of drones, the illegal operation of some 2 lakh commercial and recreational drones raises the question, is this inexorable due to the inherent complexities of the drone regulations? Further, the public notice issued by the government in January 2020 (one year after the guidelines), urging all the illegal drone operators to disclose the non-compliant drones, might be construed as the concomitant addressal of the fact that the rogue guidelines were indeed , ineffective in regulating the illegal drones. Moreover, unregulated drones are an even greater threat not only to individuals’ privacy but also to the national sovereignty. This is evidenced by the reports, which provide that at least 5-6 drones are detected every day on the Indo-Pak border threatening the security of the nation.

It can be fairly inferred that drone operators continue to operate irrespective of the existing regulatory framework as they are not willing to invest a large amount of money in buying new drones compliant with the stringent stipulations, when they already possess fully functional drones. Hence, a viable solution could be that each owner be provided with an option to voluntarily retrofit their device by adding drone-policy stipulated components which were not fitted during the manufacture. This would enable them to ply their trade legally, a major incentive to come on board. This would further ensure that national security would always be the foremost priority of the stakeholders in the Civilian Drone Ecosystem. 

### Privacy Concerns: A Tell-tale Threat to Security

Drones can be used in multiple sectors and ways including the railways, agriculture, conservation of wildlife, civilian use, etc. The multi-use capability of drones makes them even more dangerous to the privacy of different entities as well as to the security of the nation. When a drone carrying a camera flies in an airspace and captures pictures and videos and further transmits the data recorded to the operator, it may amount to breach of privacy of any individual. 

The landmark judgment of KS Puttaswamy v. Union of India had upheld privacy as a fundamental right and therefore the civil aviation ministry should do better to protect it. Apart from vague guidelines such as “respect for privacy of all the stakeholders” in the guidance manual for operators, the policy does not provide much to ensure that privacy of any entity is not threatened. Further, even after being aware of the pattern and frequency of drones detected from the other side of the border, the army finds itself helpless in this regard. 

Therefore, it is the need of the hour, in the wake of the technology’s potential invasiveness that the government identifies the privacy and security risks involved with the use of drones and remodel the policy in the same light.

### Conclusion

Due to the late inception of drone policies, India is already lagging in the global race, which the other countries have been part of, for decades. In recent times where the world is plagued by the pandemic, countries like China, Ireland, Italy, Ghana, in realisation of the nonpareil utility, are exploiting UAVs’ potential in carrying out contact-free deliveries of medicines and essentials, identifying potentially infected citizens by their body temperature through drone-fitted thermal cameras, surveillance and enforcement of the social distancing guidelines, sanitisation and to reach people while minimising the risk of contamination. Drones are hence proving to be versatile and effective tools in the coronavirus epidemic. Yet in India, with drone regulation still in its infancy, their potential is not fully exploited. The late start is further disadvantaged by the existing impaired drone regulatory mechanism. It is high time that India brings its drone policy up to speed with the rapid developments that presents a world of opportunities.

The regulations in place need some modification so as to accommodate the interests of all the stakeholders. The policy needs more robust features to facilitate smoother approval of applications and renewal of drone permits. It also needs a better redressal system so that it is able to collect feedback from drone startups and create an ideal market for them. Given the sheer breadth of applications and the immense addressable market size, it would be a huge opportunity loss for drone startups in India, if the government’s drone regulations continue to leave out essential growth factors. 

_This article originally appeared in NUJS IP &amp; Technology Law Society Blog, in December 2020_
